README.md, before:

# qc_imputation

Genotype QC and imputation pipeline

Takes a list of VCF files and input parameters and performs variant and sample wise QC for both chip QC and imputation purposes

## QC steps

1. `vcf_to_bed`: Convert each VCF file to PLINK bed

- done per genotyping batch
- .vcf or .vcf.gz accepted
- excludes samples in a given text file (one sample per row)
- possibility to filter samples based on prefix (in FinnGen we use prefix ^FG here to rid non-FinnGen samples up front)
- aligns to given human reference genome
- removes non-PASS variants and non-ATCG variants (CNVs)

2. `glm_vs_panel`: Run PLINK glm firth-fallback against imputation panel to detect frequency deviations

- done per genotyping batch
- merges each bed with the panel on shared variants and runs glm dataset vs. panel
- covariates for glm: sex, PCs

3. `missingness`: Compute variant missingness and list variants with high missingness

- done per genotyping batch
- lists variants with missingness above the given threshold for exclusion

4. `snpstats`: Compute qctool snpstats (HWE p, missingness etc.)

- done per chromosome across all genotyping batches
- HWE p-value for X chromosome is based on genetic females only

5. `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`: Combines snpstats across chromosomes and lists variants to be excluded from all batches based on stats

- done across all genotyping batches
- creates a list of variants to exclude from all batches
- excludes variants that were non-PASS (output of `vcf_to_bed`) in at least the given number of batches
- excludes variants with high missingness (output of `missingness`) in at least the given number of batches
- excludes variants with overall MAF below the given threshold (usually not used in practice i.e. the threshold is 0)
- excludes variants with overall HWE exact p-value less than the given threshold (for X chromosome HWE is computed with genetic females only) - exception: variants below a given frequency that have a deficiency in homozygotes escape this exclusion, e.g. rs201754030 in TSFM is severe in recessive state and would be excluded based on HWE without this exception
- excludes variants with overall missingness above the given threshold (usually not used in practice i.e. the threshold is 1)

6. `panel_comparison`: Creates batch-panel comparison plots and lists variants to exclude based on glm

- done per genotyping batch
- takes glm stats computed in `glm_vs_panel`
- lists variants with glm p-value less than the given threshold for exclusion
- for imputation lists variants that are not in the panel or whose AF in the panel is less than the given threshold
- creates AF comparison plots batch vs. panel

7. `batch_qc`: Performs batch-wise QC

- done per genotyping batch
- creates a list of variants to exclude from each batch
- variants listed for exclusion by `vcf_to_bed`, `gather_snpstats_joint_qc` and `panel_comparison` are excluded up front before batch-wise QC
- excludes variants with HWE exact p-value less than the given threshold
- excludes variants with missingness above the given threshold
- excludes samples that fail PLINK sex check with the given f thresholds
- excludes samples that don't have the same sex as indicated by SSN
- excludes samples with missingness above the given threshold
- excludes samples with heterozygosity more than the given number of standard deviations above the mean (contamination)
- excludes samples with an excessive number of relatives based on two round of pi-hat calculation with the given thresholds

8. `duplicates`: Lists samples to include/exclude in each batch removing duplicates (same sample ID or \_dupX suffix)

- in a duplicate pair, the sample with more variants called is included in the data

9. `plots`: Creates QC plots and creates variant and sample exclusion summaries

- done both for each genotyping batch and across batches

10. `filter_batch`: Filters the PLINK files of each batch file excluding samples and variants based on the above QC

- done per genotyping batch
- done for chip qc purpose only, not for imputation
- excludes variants based on QC across batches (output of `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`)
- excludes variants based on batch-wise QC (output of `batch_qc`)
- excludes samples based on batch-wise QC with duplicates removed (output of `duplicates`)

11. `merge_batches`: Merges genotyping batches

- done per chromosome
- done for chip qc purpose only, not for imputation
- merges genotyping batch PLINK datasets (output of `filter_batch`) to a VCF

Steps 12-14 are done in the `imp_sub.wdl` subworkflow for imputation

12. `plink_to_vcf`: Converts the PLINK files of each batch to VCFs excluding samples and variants based on the above QC for imputation

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- excludes variants based on QC across batches (output of `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`)
- excludes variants based on batch-wise QC (output of `batch_qc`)
- excludes variants not in the imputation panel or low AF in the panel (output of `panel_comparison`)
- excludes samples based on batch-wise QC with duplicates removed (output of `duplicates`)

13. `phase_impute`: Phases (eagle) and imputes (beagle) each chromosome of each batch

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- uses the filtered genotype files (output of `plink_to_vcf`)
- outputs phased genotype data and imputed genotype data

14. `post_imputation`: Annotates imputed genotype files with INFO tags

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- adds AF, INFO, CHIP, AC_Het, AC_Hom, HWE tags to the VCF INFO field
- creates AF/INFO plots
- creates a tabix index

15. `post_subset_sub.subset_samples`: Removes SSN duplicates and denials across batches

- done across all genotyping batches
- done separately for chip qc and imputation purposes
- removes remaining SSN duplicates and denials based on given lists
- biobank returns need to contain denials and SSN duplicates so this is done as the last thing

## Configuration

Note that all input text files should be UTF-8 encoded

QC/imputation pipeline imputation.wdl inputs

```
    "qc_imputation.docker" docker image to use in QC tasks
    "qc_imputation.imputation.docker" docker image to use in imputation tasks
    "qc_imputation.name": name of the run, e.g. r10_affy
    "qc_imputation.run_imputation": true/false, whether to run also imputation or only QC - best to first set this to false and check that the QC is fine before running imputation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.force_impute_variants": location of a list of variants to force imputation of even if they otherwise pass QC (can be an empty file),
    "qc_imputation.snpstats.run_joint_qc": true/false, whether to run joint qc across all batches or not
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.check_ssn_sex": true/false, whether to check sex against provided list of social security number based sex
    "qc_imputation.vcf_loc": location of genotype data VCF files to run
    "qc_imputation.fam_loc": location of genotype data FAM files to run
    "qc_imputation.exclude_samples_loc": location of samples to exclude from the run
    "qc_imputation.duplicate_samples": location of tab-delimited list of duplicate ids (same individual genotyped many times)
    "qc_imputation.exclude_denials": location of denial list
    "qc_imputation.include_regex": regex of samples to include in the run, e.g. "^FG" to only include FinnGen ids
    "qc_imputation.vcf_to_bed.ref_fasta": location of reference genome FASTA file
    "qc_imputation.chrs": list of chromosomes to run
    "qc_imputation.genome_build": genome build version (38)
    "qc_imputation.panel_comparison.p": p-value threshold to use in excluding variants based on GWAS against panel, e.g. 5e-8
    "qc_imputation.panel_comparison.af_panel": variants with AF smaller than this threshold will not be given to imputation
    "qc_imputation.high_ld_regions": location of list of high-LD regions of the genome
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.panel_bed": location of imputation panel PLINK bed file,
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.pca_ld": PLINK LD parameters to use in PCA in comparison against imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.pca_maf": minimum allele frequency to use in PCA in comparison against imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.missingness.variant_missing_n_batches": if there are at least `qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.missingness_n_batches` batches with missingness higher than this threshold, the variant will be excluded from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.af": minimum allele frequency in the genotype data - variants below this frequency will be excluded from imputation - this can be 0 as we're using the imputation panel to determine minimum frequency to use
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.hw": HWE p-value threshold - variants below this threshold across all batches will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.escape_hwe_maf": variants with frequency smaller than this threshold and with homozygote deficiency escape HWE check across batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.non_pass_n_batches": variants that didn't pass Affy QC pipeline in at least this number of batches will be removed from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.missingness_n_batches": variants with missingness higher than `qc_imputation.missingness.variant_missing_n_batches` in at least this number of batches will be excluded from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.variant_missing_overall": maximum variant missingness computed across all batches - variants above this missingness will be excluded - this can be 1 because different batches may contain different variants which can lead to high overall missingness
    "qc_imputation.f": PLINK F thresholds for determining genotype sex - individuals between this range will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.ssn_sex": location of list of social security number based sexes
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat": pi-hat threshold to use in detecting sample contamination
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.variant_missing": maximum variant missingess in batch QC - variants above this missingess will be excluded from imputation of the batch
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.sample_missing": maximum sample missingess in batch QC - samples above this missingess will be excluded from imputation
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pihat_ld": PLINK LD parameters for pruning for pi-hat calculation
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.hw": HWE p-value threshold for the batch - variants below this will be excluded from imputation of the batch
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.het_sd": heterozygosity standard deviation threshold X - samples with heterozygosity lower than mean - X*sdev or higher than mean + X*sdev will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat_min_n_excess": maximum excessive number of relatives based on pi-hat - in the first round of pi-hat calculation samples with more than this number of relatives will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat_min_n": maximum number of relatives based on pi-hat - in the second round of pi-hat calculation samples with more than this number of relatives will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.ref_panel": chromosome-to-imputation_panel_vcf_location_with_SNPID dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.ref_panel": chromosome-to-imputation_panel_vcf_location dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.genetic_maps_eagle": chromosome-to-genetic_map_for_eagle dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.genetic_maps_beagle": chromosome-to-genetic_map_for_beagle dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.ref_panel_freq": location of allele frequencies in the imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_hdr": location of header file to use in post-imputation annotation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_tab": location of gzipped .tab file to use in post-imputation annotation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_tab_index": location of tabix index of the above
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_col_incl": list of inclusion columns in post-imputation annotation
```

## Running

The QC/imputation pipeline can be run directly using Cromwell. Either the Cromwell Swagger UI or the [CromwellInteract](https://github.com/FINNGEN/CromwellInteract) command-line tool can be used

Example:

zip dependencies

```
cd wdl
zip sub.zip imp_sub.wdl post_subset_sub.wdl
cd ..
```

_NOTE: you need to have socks ssh tunnel running in port 5000 connected to cromwell machine_

Create tunnel if necessary:

```
CromwellInteract.py connect cromwell-machine-name
```

Then run pipeline, e.g. for legacy batches

```
CromwellInteract.py submit --wdl wdl/imputation.wdl --inputs wdl/imputation.r7.legacy.json --deps wdl/sub.zip
```

## Copying output to targe buckets

### Copy imputed file results

These examples from R7 final imputation runs.

Files before duplicate removal created in `qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs` task:

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles 7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399 qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://from_analysis_team/r7imputation/release_run/before_duplicate_removal_for_BB/
```

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://from_analysis_team/r7imputation/release_run/before_duplicate_removal_for_BB/
```

Files after merging in `qc_imputation.paste.out` output tag:

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c qc_imputation.paste.out | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://output_bucket
```

## Merge multiple runs and remove duplicates across runs

After successful run of different qc/imputation pipelines( e.g. separately for legacy and affy), we need to do duplicate removal across all batches in all runs.

qc/imputation pipeline creates sample qc summary stats and we pick the sample with the most variants after qc as the genotype ID to keep.

_NOTE: you need to have socks ssh tunnel running in port 5000 connected to cromwell machine in all below commands_.
Create tunnel if necessary:

```
CromwellInteract.py connect cromwell-machine-name
```

Create configuration file using:

```
scripts/generate_dedup_merge_conf.py hash1,hash2 duplicateids_file outprefix
```

Parameters:

1. comma separated list of cromwell job hashes (e.g. affy run, legacy run)
2. file with duplicate ids for a single individual. Each row should have tab separated list of alternate genotyping IDs.
3. outputprefix of created files

Example from R7 production runs:

```
scripts/generate_dedup_merge_conf.py "a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c,7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399" finngen_R7_duplicate_list.txt finngen_R7
```

**Upload the created configuration files to bucket**

Files:

- {outprefix}\_final_sample_removals . Add any sample IDs to be removed here in case additional removals are needed (e.g. samples in that are not in exclusions list).
- {outprefix}\_all_batches_per_chr

In our example:

- finngen_R7_final_sample_removals
- finngen_R7_all_batches_per_chr.

Modify json in `wdl/merge_dedub_qc_imps.json` to point to those those config files.

**Submit duplicate removal and final merge by chromosome**

zip dependencies

```
zip -j wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_deps.zip wdl/dedup.wdl
```

**Run pipeline:**

```
CromwellInteract.py submit --wdl wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps.wdl --inputs wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_remove_non_inclusion_r7.json --deps wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_deps.zip
```

**copy output**

Per batch duplicates removed
Final merged files

## Production runs

**Release 7 runs **

Data was ran in cromwell-fg-1

- Legacy data batches hash 7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399
- Affy data a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c
- Removal of final non-inclusions samples and deduplication across batches combined 8934d7cc-97d1-47fe-8893-c8799943d2ff

List of final non included samples

```
comm -23 <(gsutil cat gs://thl-incoming-data/from-data-team/R7/fgfactory_pass_samples_R7.txt | awk 'BEGIN{ FS=":";} NR>1{ print $6}' | sort -b) <(gsutil cat gs://r7_data/R7_lists_from_Tero/finngen_R7_finngenid_inclusion_list.txt | sort -b)  > r7_samples_not_in_inclusion
```

Commit message:

address review comments, handle Y/MT, merge chip data to one dataset, get variant exclusions to one file, workaround hwe bug, fixes for legacy batches

README.md, after:

# qc_imputation

Genotype QC and imputation pipeline

Takes a list of VCF files and input parameters and performs variant and sample wise QC for both chip QC and imputation purposes

## QC steps

1. `vcf_to_bed`: Convert each VCF file to PLINK bed

- done per genotyping batch
- .vcf or .vcf.gz accepted
- excludes samples in a given text file (one sample per row)
- possibility to filter samples based on prefix (in FinnGen we use prefix ^FG here to rid non-FinnGen samples up front)
- aligns to given human reference genome
- removes non-PASS variants and non-ATCG variants (CNVs)

2. `glm_vs_panel`: Run PLINK glm firth-fallback against imputation panel to detect frequency deviations

- done per genotyping batch
- merges each bed with the panel on shared variants and runs glm dataset vs. panel
- covariates for glm: sex, PCs

3. `missingness`: Compute variant missingness and list variants with high missingness

- done per genotyping batch
- lists variants with missingness above the given threshold for exclusion

4. `snpstats`: Compute qctool snpstats (HWE p, missingness etc.)

- done per chromosome across all genotyping batches
- HWE p-value for X chromosome is based on genetic females only

5. `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`: Combines snpstats across chromosomes and lists variants to be excluded from all batches based on stats

- done across all genotyping batches
- creates a list of variants to exclude from all batches
- excludes variants that were non-PASS (output of `vcf_to_bed`) in at least the given number of batches
- excludes variants with high missingness (output of `missingness`) in at least the given number of batches
- excludes variants with overall MAF below the given threshold (usually not used in practice i.e. the threshold is 0)
- excludes variants with overall HWE exact p-value less than the given threshold (for X chromosome HWE is computed with genetic females only) - exception: variants below a given frequency that have a deficiency in homozygotes escape this exclusion, e.g. rs201754030 in TSFM is severe in recessive state and would be excluded based on HWE without this exception
- excludes variants with overall missingness above the given threshold (usually not used in practice i.e. the threshold is 1)

6. `panel_comparison`: Creates batch-panel comparison plots and lists variants to exclude based on glm

- done per genotyping batch
- takes glm stats computed in `glm_vs_panel`
- lists variants with glm p-value less than the given threshold for exclusion
- for imputation lists variants that are not in the panel or whose AF in the panel is less than the given threshold
- creates AF comparison plots batch vs. panel

7. `batch_qc`: Performs batch-wise QC

- done per genotyping batch
- creates a list of variants to exclude from each batch
- variants listed for exclusion by `vcf_to_bed`, `gather_snpstats_joint_qc` and `panel_comparison` are excluded up front before batch-wise QC
- excludes variants with HWE exact p-value less than the given threshold
- excludes variants with missingness above the given threshold
- excludes samples that fail PLINK sex check with the given f thresholds
- excludes samples that don't have the same sex as indicated by SSN
- excludes samples with missingness above the given threshold
- excludes samples with heterozygosity more than the given number of standard deviations above the mean (contamination)
- excludes samples with an excessive number of relatives based on two round of pi-hat calculation with the given thresholds

8. `duplicates`: Lists samples to include/exclude in each batch removing duplicates (same sample ID or \_dupX suffix)

- in a duplicate pair, the sample with more variants called is included in the data

9. `plots`: Creates QC plots and creates variant and sample exclusion summaries

- done both for each genotyping batch and across batches

10. `filter_batch`: Filters the PLINK files of each batch file excluding samples and variants based on the above QC

- done per genotyping batch
- done for chip qc purpose only, not for imputation
- excludes variants based on QC across batches (output of `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`)
- excludes variants based on batch-wise QC (output of `batch_qc`)
- excludes samples based on batch-wise QC with duplicates removed (output of `duplicates`)

11. `merge_batches`: Merges genotyping batches

- done per chromosome
- done for chip qc purpose only, not for imputation
- merges genotyping batch PLINK datasets (output of `filter_batch`) to a VCF

Steps 12-14 are done in the `imp_sub.wdl` subworkflow for imputation if the `run_imputation` input flag is set

12. `plink_to_vcf`: Converts the PLINK files of each batch to VCFs excluding samples and variants based on the above QC for imputation

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- excludes variants based on QC across batches (output of `gather_snpstats_joint_qc`)
- excludes variants based on batch-wise QC (output of `batch_qc`)
- excludes variants not in the imputation panel or low AF in the panel (output of `panel_comparison`)
- excludes samples based on batch-wise QC with duplicates removed (output of `duplicates`)

13. `phase_impute`: Phases (eagle) and imputes (beagle) each chromosome of each batch

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- uses the filtered genotype files (output of `plink_to_vcf`)
- outputs phased genotype data and imputed genotype data

14. `post_imputation`: Annotates imputed genotype files with INFO tags

- done per genotyping batch and per chrosomome
- adds AF, INFO, CHIP, AC_Het, AC_Hom, HWE tags to the VCF INFO field
- creates AF/INFO plots
- creates a tabix index

15. `post_subset_sub.subset_samples`: Removes SSN duplicates and denials across batches

- done across all genotyping batches per chromosome
- done separately for chip qc and imputation purposes
- removes remaining SSN duplicates and denials based on given lists
- biobank returns need to contain denials and SSN duplicates so this is done as the last thing

16. `merge_chip_data`: Merges chip data into one dataset

- done across all genotyping batches and chromosomes
- merges chip data after `post_subset_sub.subset_samples` to one VCF and PLINK dataset

## Configuration

Note that all input text files should be UTF-8 encoded

QC/imputation pipeline imputation.wdl inputs

```
    "qc_imputation.docker" docker image to use in QC tasks
    "qc_imputation.imputation.docker" docker image to use in imputation tasks
    "qc_imputation.name": name of the run, e.g. r10_affy
    "qc_imputation.run_imputation": true/false, whether to run also imputation or only QC - best to first set this to false and check that the QC is fine before running imputation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.force_impute_variants": location of a list of variants to force imputation of even if they otherwise pass QC (can be an empty file),
    "qc_imputation.snpstats.run_joint_qc": true/false, whether to run joint qc across all batches or not
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.check_ssn_sex": true/false, whether to check sex against provided list of social security number based sex
    "qc_imputation.vcf_loc": location of genotype data VCF files to run
    "qc_imputation.fam_loc": location of genotype data FAM files to run
    "qc_imputation.exclude_samples_loc": location of samples to exclude from the run
    "qc_imputation.duplicate_samples": location of tab-delimited list of duplicate ids (same individual genotyped many times)
    "qc_imputation.exclude_denials": location of denial list
    "qc_imputation.include_regex": regex of samples to include in the run, e.g. "^FG" to only include FinnGen ids
    "qc_imputation.vcf_to_bed.ref_fasta": location of reference genome FASTA file
    "qc_imputation.chrs": list of chromosomes to run
    "qc_imputation.genome_build": genome build version (38)
    "qc_imputation.panel_comparison.p": p-value threshold to use in excluding variants based on GWAS against panel, e.g. 5e-8
    "qc_imputation.panel_comparison.af_panel": variants with AF smaller than this threshold will not be given to imputation
    "qc_imputation.high_ld_regions": location of list of high-LD regions of the genome
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.panel_bed": location of imputation panel PLINK bed file,
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.pca_ld": PLINK LD parameters to use in PCA in comparison against imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.glm_vs_panel.pca_maf": minimum allele frequency to use in PCA in comparison against imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.missingness.variant_missing_n_batches": if there are at least `qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.missingness_n_batches` batches with missingness higher than this threshold, the variant will be excluded from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.af": minimum allele frequency in the genotype data - variants below this frequency will be excluded from imputation - this can be 0 as we're using the imputation panel to determine minimum frequency to use
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.hw": HWE p-value threshold - variants below this threshold across all batches will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.escape_hwe_maf": variants with frequency smaller than this threshold and with homozygote deficiency escape HWE check across batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.non_pass_n_batches": variants that didn't pass Affy QC pipeline in at least this number of batches will be removed from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.missingness_n_batches": variants with missingness higher than `qc_imputation.missingness.variant_missing_n_batches` in at least this number of batches will be excluded from all batches
    "qc_imputation.gather_snpstats_joint_qc.variant_missing_overall": maximum variant missingness computed across all batches - variants above this missingness will be excluded - this can be 1 because different batches may contain different variants which can lead to high overall missingness
    "qc_imputation.f": PLINK F thresholds for determining genotype sex - individuals between this range will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.ssn_sex": location of list of social security number based sexes
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat": pi-hat threshold to use in detecting sample contamination
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.variant_missing": maximum variant missingess in batch QC - variants above this missingess will be excluded from imputation of the batch
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.sample_missing": maximum sample missingess in batch QC - samples above this missingess will be excluded from imputation
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pihat_ld": PLINK LD parameters for pruning for pi-hat calculation
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.hw": HWE p-value threshold for the batch - variants below this will be excluded from imputation of the batch
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.het_sd": heterozygosity standard deviation threshold X - samples with heterozygosity lower than mean - X*sdev or higher than mean + X*sdev will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat_min_n_excess": maximum excessive number of relatives based on pi-hat - in the first round of pi-hat calculation samples with more than this number of relatives will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.batch_qc.pi_hat_min_n": maximum number of relatives based on pi-hat - in the second round of pi-hat calculation samples with more than this number of relatives will be excluded
    "qc_imputation.ref_panel": chromosome-to-imputation_panel_vcf_location_with_SNPID dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.ref_panel": chromosome-to-imputation_panel_vcf_location dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.genetic_maps_eagle": chromosome-to-genetic_map_for_eagle dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.phase_impute.genetic_maps_beagle": chromosome-to-genetic_map_for_beagle dictionary
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.ref_panel_freq": location of allele frequencies in the imputation panel
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_hdr": location of header file to use in post-imputation annotation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_tab": location of gzipped .tab file to use in post-imputation annotation
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_tab_index": location of tabix index of the above
    "qc_imputation.imputation.post_imputation.annot_col_incl": list of inclusion columns in post-imputation annotation
```

## Running

The QC/imputation pipeline can be run directly using Cromwell. Either the Cromwell Swagger UI or the [CromwellInteract](https://github.com/FINNGEN/CromwellInteract) command-line tool can be used

Example:

zip dependencies

```
cd wdl
zip sub.zip imp_sub.wdl post_subset_sub.wdl
cd ..
```

_NOTE: you need to have socks ssh tunnel running in port 5000 connected to cromwell machine_

Create tunnel if necessary:

```
CromwellInteract.py connect cromwell-machine-name
```

Then run pipeline, e.g. for legacy batches

```
CromwellInteract.py submit --wdl wdl/imputation.wdl --inputs wdl/imputation.r7.legacy.json --deps wdl/sub.zip
```

## Copying output to targe buckets

### Copy imputed file results

These examples from R7 final imputation runs.

Files before duplicate removal created in `qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs` task:

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles 7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399 qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://from_analysis_team/r7imputation/release_run/before_duplicate_removal_for_BB/
```

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c qc_imputation.imputation.vcfs | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://from_analysis_team/r7imputation/release_run/before_duplicate_removal_for_BB/
```

Files after merging in `qc_imputation.paste.out` output tag:

```
CromwellInteract.py outfiles a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c qc_imputation.paste.out | awk '{ print $1; print $1".tbi"}' | gsutil -m cp -I  gs://output_bucket
```

## Merge multiple runs and remove duplicates across runs

After successful run of different qc/imputation pipelines( e.g. separately for legacy and affy), we need to do duplicate removal across all batches in all runs.

qc/imputation pipeline creates sample qc summary stats and we pick the sample with the most variants after qc as the genotype ID to keep.

_NOTE: you need to have socks ssh tunnel running in port 5000 connected to cromwell machine in all below commands_.
Create tunnel if necessary:

```
CromwellInteract.py connect cromwell-machine-name
```

Create configuration file using:

```
scripts/generate_dedup_merge_conf.py hash1,hash2 duplicateids_file outprefix
```

Parameters:

1. comma separated list of cromwell job hashes (e.g. affy run, legacy run)
2. file with duplicate ids for a single individual. Each row should have tab separated list of alternate genotyping IDs.
3. outputprefix of created files

Example from R7 production runs:

```
scripts/generate_dedup_merge_conf.py "a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c,7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399" finngen_R7_duplicate_list.txt finngen_R7
```

**Upload the created configuration files to bucket**

Files:

- {outprefix}\_final_sample_removals . Add any sample IDs to be removed here in case additional removals are needed (e.g. samples in that are not in exclusions list).
- {outprefix}\_all_batches_per_chr

In our example:

- finngen_R7_final_sample_removals
- finngen_R7_all_batches_per_chr.

Modify json in `wdl/merge_dedub_qc_imps.json` to point to those those config files.

**Submit duplicate removal and final merge by chromosome**

zip dependencies

```
zip -j wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_deps.zip wdl/dedup.wdl
```

**Run pipeline:**

```
CromwellInteract.py submit --wdl wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps.wdl --inputs wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_remove_non_inclusion_r7.json --deps wdl/merge_dedup_qc_imps_deps.zip
```

**copy output**

Per batch duplicates removed
Final merged files

## Production runs

**Release 7 runs **

Data was ran in cromwell-fg-1

- Legacy data batches hash 7c9804b0-1850-4c76-8643-c628332db399
- Affy data a371ed62-cf5c-43ee-b755-8790eb3efe0c
- Removal of final non-inclusions samples and deduplication across batches combined 8934d7cc-97d1-47fe-8893-c8799943d2ff

List of final non included samples

```
comm -23 <(gsutil cat gs://thl-incoming-data/from-data-team/R7/fgfactory_pass_samples_R7.txt | awk 'BEGIN{ FS=":";} NR>1{ print $6}' | sort -b) <(gsutil cat gs://r7_data/R7_lists_from_Tero/finngen_R7_finngenid_inclusion_list.txt | sort -b)  > r7_samples_not_in_inclusion
```
